# Sinatra Sessions Lab - User Logins

## Introduction

You've been contracted by Flatiron Bank to consult on their online banking
application. Specifically, they've asked you to build out their user login
process. Based on your knowledge of sessions, build out the log in and log out
features, and ensure that users that log in can only see their own balance.

## Helper Methods

MVC architecture relies heavily on the principle of separation of concerns. We
make sure that we have a different model for every class we build, that we only
have one `.erb` file per view, etc. This even extends to the purposes each of
these files has. A model handles our Ruby logic, our controllers handle the
HTTP requests and connect to our models, and our views either take in or
display data to our users.

This means that we want to minimize the amount of logic our views contain. Our
views should never directly pull from the database (ie. `User.all`, etc). All
of that should be taken care of in the controller actions, and the data should
be passed to the view via a specific controller action.

But if you think about most web applications you use, there is information on
most pages that is dependent on being logged in. You can see a lot of
information if you are logged in and practically none if you're not. So how can
you handle that sort of application flow without logic?

Instead of writing that type of logic directly into a view, we use helper
methods. Helper methods are methods that are written in the controller, are
accessible in the views, and provide some logical support. But a helper method
is just a regular method, defined using `def` and `end` just like you've always
done.

In the `app/helpers` directory, we're going to define a separate class
specifically designed to control logic in our views. This `Helpers` class will
have two class methods, `current_user` and `is_logged_in?`.

These two methods will only ever be called in views, particularly
`account.erb`, in order to add double protection to this view so that only the
current user, when they are logged in, can see their bank account balance.

It's important to note that helper methods can be used for a lot more than just
tracking whether a user is logged in and who the current user is. Helpers are
methods that make it cleaner to add logic to our views.

## Instructions

* You'll want to create a User class and a table to store users. Users should
  have a username, password, and balance (a decimal storing their bank account
  balance). In the `db` folder is a `seeds.rb` file containing some
  basic users to practice logging in with. Run `rake db:migrate` and
  `rake db:seed` once your User migration and model are in place.

* You'll need to create a login form on the index page that accepts a username
  and password and sends a `POST` request with an action of `/login`.

* In the controller action that processes the `POST` request, you'll want to
  find the user in the database based on their username.

* If there is a match, set the session to the user's ID, redirect them to the
  `/account` route (using `redirect to`), and use ERB to display the user's
  data on the page.

* If there is no match, render the error page.

* On the `/account` page, set up a link called 'Log Out' that clears the
  session.

* In `app/helpers/helpers.rb`, you'll notice a predefined `Helpers` class. In
  this class, you'll want to define two **class** methods, `current_user` and
  `is_logged_in?`.

* `current_user` should accept the session hash as an argument. This method
  should use the `user_id` from the session hash to find the user in the
  database and return that user.

* `is_logged_in?` should also accept the session hash as an argument. This
  method should return true if the `user_id` is in the session hash and false
  if not. The Ruby `!!` operator will come in handy here.

* In `account.erb`, you'll want to use the `is_logged_in?` helper method to
  only display the username and account balance if the user is logged in.
  Otherwise, it should contain a link to the home page. You'll also want to use
  `current_user` to display the username and balance.

<p data-visibility='hidden'>View <a href='https://learn.co/lessons/sinatra-logging-in-and-out' title='Sinatra Sessions Lab - User Logins'>Sinatra Sessions Lab - User Logins</a> on Learn.co and start learning to code for free.</p>
